Once around epsylon
indie got this lovely artist's
impression for the title slide of this
very interesting
system located in the constellation of
Indis. Here we have Epsilon Indie, a
fairly modest magnitude 4.7
star. And the Herpos satellite was able
to prove this was close by, just 12
light years away. And back in
1847, Darest noticed that it had a very
high proper motion. So its position
against the other stars was changing
year to year. Um and he looked on a
couple of star maps eight years apart
and could tell that it had changed
position and that is typical of nearby
stars. This high proper motion is just
because they are close to us. So he was
the first person to be onto the fact
this was one of the sun's near
neighbors. And in fact we have this uh
pseudo 3D plot of the region of stars
around the sun. the sun in the center,
Alpha and Proxima Centuri very close by,
Barnard Star, some of the others that we
might talk about in other talks, and
Epsilon Indie down there at the bottom,
an orange
dot, very appropriate orange dot because
it is an orange K-class main sequence
star, just
4,649 Kelvin, so cooler than the sun,
around about 80% of the mass and 70% of
the radius. But that lower mass goes
with a much lower overall power output.
Just 21% of the total power. And on the
good old Herzbrung Russell diagram,
there it is just in the top end of the
orange star
group. Somewhat cooler and fainter than
the sun, but nevertheless consuming
hydrogen in its core, turning it into
helium. And it's only about 3.5 billion
years old. So somewhat younger than the
sun, but with an expected lifetime given
its mass of around 20 billion years. So
this one's going to be around for quite
some
time. Now what's really interesting
about it is the companions that have
been discovered. And this is a pair of
brown dwarfs, failed stars, large
gaseous bodies that have pulled
themselves together under gravity, but
only achieved enough mass
to
be warm but not trigger nuclear fusion
in the core. So we have epsylon indie BA
and BB in orbit around each other and
these are both brown dwarfs classed as
TE type T1 and T6
respectively with 30 and 50 times the
mass of Jupiter. Now I think you have to
get to 75 times the mass of Jupiter
before there is enough mass to generate
the pressures and temperatures in the
core for a star to ignite hydrogen
burning properly the proton proton chain
to form helium and become an
Mclass red dwarf star. And we have the
little diagram at the bottom showing an
Mclass red dwarf. And then at the right
the planet Jupiter. And there three
categories of brown dwarfs. These
intermediate missing links between gas
giant planets and stars classed as LT
and Y. And these two are the
intermediate ones T with temperatures at
their surface of,300 and 900° Kelvin.
um if they were a bit bigger they would
become L-class and the reason for that
is more gravity creates enough pressure
to trigger some limited nuclear fusion
of things like dutyium and even a little
bit of lithium burning if you have
enough lithium to uh raise the
temperature a bit and uh so you can get
a little bit hotter but not become a
full-blown star until you get to
75. So these uh orbit each other and
then the pair orbit around the main star
at a distance of 1460 astronomical
units. So a reasonable distance. And we
have this fantastic James Webb
telescope, I'm sorry, Hubble Space
Telescope picture uh of the star in the
center with an obscuring uh metal object
to blot out some of the light to reveal
in the top left there. The pair
of brown dwarfs uh reveal revealed with
the HST Nickmos instrument um shown as
two separate little dots. So, we've got
an artist's impression just showing
what's going on here. The whole lot's
about 12 light years from the sun. The
pair of brown dwarfs orbit each other at
a distance of about two astronomical
units, two times the distance from the
earth to the sun. So, 300 million
kilometers. And they're about 1,500
kilometers or so away from the main uh
star there, Epsilon India.
Now, epsilon NDA also has a planet. So,
this is called epsilon inda lowerase B.
And this is a super Jupiter. It has a
mass of 6.31 times the mass of Jupiter.
So, not massive enough yet to really be
classed as a brown dwarf. It would have
to be about 13 Jupiter masses to make
one of those
Yclass smallest brown dwarfs, but
nevertheless quite a monster. And this
actually makes it the second closest
Jupiterike planet to the solar system.
The record holder is currently a planet
B in orbit around Epsilon Aerodani. Uh
there's a once around talk about
epsyloni which I recommend you go and
have a look at and this
guy epsylon indieab is in an elliptical
orbit taking 171.3 years and this time
it is a James Webb Space Telescope
picture. Again we've blotted out the
central star and the dot there is a
direct image of this super Jupiter
planet. Got another couple of images in
different wavebands. Again, James Webb
with the MIRI instrument. And these are
at 10 12 microns and 15 12 microns
showing again the central star marked
with a large uh graphic star and then
the actual planet shown as a bright disc
around it. Quite a lot of disturbance
and what looks like dust as well, but uh
that's another story. And so we have an
artist's impression of course of this
super Jupiter planet orbiting
around the main star. Now again the uh
epsylon indie seems to be moving around
the galaxy with a whole group of 16
other population one stars. Population
one meaning that they are um late
formers. They've been formed
recently and consist of the more
dirty chemical composition. And these 16
stars seem to all be moving around the
galaxy together, suggesting that they
were formed together back in the day and
uh possibly pointing to some galactic
merger or perhaps a star cluster that
was boiled away and disrupted. And
that's still an active area of galactic
archaeology to understand this epsylon
indie moving
group. And so I will leave you with the
HST Nickmas picture which I think is
fantastic showing this pair of white uh
red pair of brown dwarfs that are really
close to the sun in terms of uh the
overall galactic structure. So right in
our backyard and that's once around
Epsilon Indie.